---
layout: post
title: ASP.NET 3.5 Extensions Release
date: 2007-11-30 10:24:22 -05:00
---

Now that Visual Studio 2008 and .NET 3.5 have officially shipped, it's time to start looking at the additional products and tools that build on top of that foundation. Scott Guthrie has an excellent [post](http://weblogs.asp.net/scottgu/archive/2007/11/29/net-web-product-roadmap-asp-net-silverlight-iis7.aspx) that details the roadmap for the Web related products.

The biggest announcement is that the ASP.NET 3.5 Extensions will have it's first public preview available sometime next week. If you don't know what the ASP.NET 3.5 Extensions are, here is the list (taken from Scott's post):

*   <u>ASP.NET MVC</u>: This model view controller (MVC) framework for ASP.NET provides a structured model that enables a clear separation of concerns within web applications, and makes it easier to unit test your code and support a TDD workflow.  It also helps provide more control over the URLs you publish in your applications, and more control over the HTML that is emitted from them.  

*   <u>ASP.NET AJAX Improvements</u>: New ASP.NET AJAX features in the ASP.NET 3.5 Extensions release will include better browser history support (back/forward button integration, and server-side history management support via a new <asp:history> server control), improved AJAX content linking support with permalinks, and additional JavaScript library improvements.  

*   <u>ASP.NET Dynamic Data Support</u>: The ASP.NET 3.5 Extensions release will deliver new features that enable faster creation of data driven web sites.  It provides a rich scaffolding framework, and enables rapid data driven site development using both ASP.NET WebForms and ASP.NET MVC.  

*   <u>ASP.NET Silverlight Support</u>: With the ASP.NET 3.5 Extensions release we'll deliver support for easily integrating Silverlight within your ASP.NET applications.  Included will be new controls that make it easy to integrate Silverlight video/media and interactive content within your sites.  

*   <u>ADO.NET Data Services</u>: In parallel with the ASP.NET Extensions release we will also be releasing the ADO.NET Entity Framework.  This provides a new modeling framework that enables developers to define a conceptual model of a database schema that closely aligns to a real world view of the information.  We will also be shipping a new set of data services (codename "Astoria") that make it easy to expose REST based API endpoints from within your ASP.NET applications.  

I am definitely looking forward to seeing this CTP since it plays very nicely into some projects that I'm getting ready to start working on. 
