---
layout: post
title: "SyncToy 2.0 Beta"
date: 2007-10-26 22:24:27 -05:00
---

Early last year, Microsoft release a great little power toy called [SyncToy](http://www.microsoft.com/prophoto/downloads/synctoy.aspx) as an easy to use, customizable application helps you copy, move, rename, and delete files between folders and computers. Earlier this week, they announced the availability of the SyncToy 2.0 Beta, available from the [Microsoft Download Center](http://www.microsoft.com/downloads/details.aspx?familyid=c26efa36-98e0-4ee9-a7c5-98d0592d8c52&displaylang=en&tm).

Taken from the SyncToy 2.0 download page, the following features were added to this release of SyncToy: 

*   **Dynamic Drive Letter Assignment:** Drive letter reassignment will now be detected and updated in the folder pair definition.  
*   **True Folder Sync:** Folder creates, renames and deletes are now synchronized for all SyncToy actions.  
*   **Exclusion Filtering Based on Name:** File exclusion based on name with exact or fuzzy matching.  
*   **Filtering Based on File Attributes:** The ability to exclude files based on one or more file attributes (Read-Only, System, Hidden).  
*   **Unattended Folder Pair Execution:** Addressed issues related to running scheduled folder pairs while logged off.  
*   **Folder Pairs With Shared Endpoints:** Ability for folder pairs associated with the same or different instances of SyncToy to share end-points.  
*   **Command line enhancements:** Added the ability to manage folder pairs via the command line interface.  
*   **Sync Encrypted Files:** Sync of Encrypted files works when local folder and files are encrypted, which addresses the common scenario involving sync between local, encrypted laptop PC folder and remote, unencrypted desktop PC folder. 
*   **Sub-folder Exclusion Enhancements:** Descendents creates under excluded sub-folders are automatically excluded.  
*   **Folder Pair Metadata Moved:** Folder pair metadata removed from MyDocuments to resolve any issues with server-based folder pair re-direction setup. 

Also as part of the new beta, the following architectural improvements have been made:

*   The SyncToy engine has been rearchitected to provide scalability and the ability to add significant enhancements in future releases. 
*   Sync engine is also more robust insomuch that many single, file level errors are skipped without affecting the entire sync operation.  
*   64-Bit compatibility  
*   Folder pair rename  
*   Removed combine and subscribe actions. 
